[Music]
now remember that unsatisfactory feeling
as a kid when you try to jump in the air
as high as possible and something brings
you back to the ground well that
something is your mother no wait it's
everybody's mother which is gravity like
your mother
it's always there it never changes and
you can't break its rules but that's for
the better if one day the Earth's
gravity disappeared the consequences
would be flat-out disastrous especially
for Mom
but first let's figure out what gravity
is simply it's a force that draws atoms
toward each other for example you take
two tennis balls and put them on the
table some gravitational attraction
already exists between them but it's so
imperceptible that you'd never notice it
however if you place these tennis balls
with two big chunks of metal and use
very special equipment you'll be able to
measure the attraction between the
pieces even though it would be extremely
small and therefore really really hard
to detect but let's take the earth our
planet is a big big number of atoms
crammed together that's why its
gravitational pull is very real and very
perceptible in other words gravity
depends on the mass which is in turn
related to the matter the more matter
you have the bigger the mass and the
bigger the mass is the stronger and
objects gravitational pull is well why
does that matter you might have noticed
that the gravity on our planet never
changes right that's because the mass of
the earth always remains the same should
huge chunks of the planet get ripped out
from under your feet the gravity would
gradually change as well but happily any
changes in the Earth's mass it could
potentially influence gravity aren't
likely to happen anytime soon but
straying into the dark side what if we
forgot about physics and imagine that
one day our planet would give off a
terrifying crack and gravity would just
disappear the most obvious outcome would
be floating I mean that you the bed
you've been sleeping on your alarm clock
and your cup of unfinished tea would
instantly rise
to the air at first you might be
surprised and the whole situation might
even seem funny after all if you were
inside it simply float gently upward
until you bump into the ceiling but your
sense of wonder wouldn't last long as
you know the earth is spinning around
its axis at a velocity of just over a
thousand miles per hour at the equator
that's why if the gravity got switched
off anything unattached to the ground
would simply fly off into space
people unlucky enough to be outside when
the gravity disappears would be gone in
the blink of an eye those people inside
buildings would be safer but not for
long it's true that man-made structures
are supposed to be firmly rooted to the
ground and they would indeed stay put
after the gravity vanishes but sooner or
later they'd also give way the same
would happen with trees however big and
sturdy they may seem furthermore the
earth would lose one of its best friends
the moon the only thing keeping the moon
from floating away and keeping our
planet's natural satellite in orbit is
the Earth's gravity but even the loss of
the moon wouldn't affect you as badly as
the loss of water and air the atmosphere
and all the water on Earth including
oceans seas lakes and rivers are kept in
place by gravity that's why without this
force the atmosphere would eventually
start to drift off into space that means
there deven chily be no air to breathe
well this is looking bad water would
begin to depart as well along with its
inhabitants
imagine sharks whales and fish encased
in bubbles of water and drifting off
into space and the bewildered
expressions on their faces but the
Dolphins would be singing so long and
thanks for all the fish later when life
on earth would cease to exist completely
well with no air and water the lack of
gravity would finally take its toll on
the planet itself without the main force
holding things together it would likely
break into pieces and float off into
space a sad scenario I would say however
it's so improbable that you might not
even consider it
happening but anyway write your ideas
about the things that would change
should gravity disappear one day down in
the comments but you know us on the
bright side we can't leave well enough
or bad enough alone so what if gravity
on the contrary became stronger and not
only on the earth but everywhere in the
universe would it influence your life
yes yes it would even if the difference
was just 5% look the Earth's orbit
depends on a delicate balance that
exists between gravity pulling it toward
the Sun and velocity carrying it away
into space if the gravity changed even
slightly it completely disrupt the
existing balance and the earth would
move into a new orbit as a result our
planet would start traveling about 10%
closer to the Sun it would trigger even
more disastrous climate changes which in
turn would lead to a lack of food and
other serious problems the Sun also has
a balance of itself gravity pulls it
together while the pressure coming from
the inside does everything to tear the
star apart now imagine the gravity
becoming just a tiny bit stronger the
equilibrium would be totally wrecked
inevitably the hydrogen gas from the
surface of the Sun would gravitate
toward its core and fuse into helium
this explosive process would unleash
colossal amounts of energy on the other
hand in the most optimistic scenario
this energy wouldn't reach the Sun
surface and you wouldn't notice anything
here on earth
what's more you might not even notice
another even more vital change because
it would take place beneath the surface
of our planet you see the Earth's core
must withstand an absurd load 24/7 and
this load is the weight of the whole
planet which equals approximately 6.5
sextillion tons if you're counting
that's 21 zeroes and then out of nowhere
wham bam this weight becomes 5% heavier
well the poor old core unable to hold
the sudden increase in load would
collapse inward terminating the
to the planet bye-bye on the other hand
the earth might avoid such a dreadful
outcome according to some estimates the
surface might just drop six to twelve
miles
but even this wouldn't save the
inhabitants of the planet however
significant that collapse would be the
Earth's crust would buckle and crack as
a result the heat coming from the
Earth's core which reaches a toasty ten
thousand eight hundred degrees would
burn everything on the surface in the
worst case scenario the whole surface of
the planet would eventually melt away
but by again wow if just 5% of added
gravity would cause such a dramatic
consequence what would happen if the
force was doubled one word squish yep
everything on the planet would instantly
become twice as heavy as it used to be
it would probably be too much stress
even for tall and strong trees let alone
most man-made structures bridges
wouldn't stand any chance neither with
large buildings such as skyscrapers
smaller houses might remain standing for
some time but they'd need to be
reinforced anything in the air be it a
bird or an aircraft would immediately
crash to the ground fliers wouldn't be
so frequent anymore experiments in
centrifuges show that people can easily
tolerate two times the Earth's gravity
for up to 22 hours with no harm to their
health as for the long-term effects of
the increased gravity they would be much
more serious your body would experience
great stress starting with your skeleton
and joints unable to support your new
weight to your muscles struggling with
even the smallest of movements plus such
strong gravity would challenge your
heart because it would have to work
extra hard to keep you going with more
gravity the number of unstable elements
beneath your surface would increase and
it would lead to increase volcanic
activity and excessive heat even dormant
volcanoes that have been sleeping for
thousands of years would wake up and
start changing the surface of the planet
but again you wouldn't have to keep up
with these challenges for too long if
gravity became twice as strong as it is
now the earth would spiral
into the Sun at a dizzying rate now
wasn't that fun yeah enough of the dark
side hey if you learned something new
today then give the video a like and
share it with a friend and here are some
other videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life
[Music]